Add 'programming' section to docs (#78)
AgonConsole8/agon-docs: docs/programming.md

Most of the languages available allow you to code in traditional 16bit or 24bit _ADL mode_, where the full amount of memory is available, not limited to 64k.

In order to help speed up development, there is also an emulator so your can program and test _most_ code quickly on your PC, before transferring to the Agon.

It doesn't matter which model you own from the Agon platform range of computers, inside they are all the same and can run exactly the same software. The only thing which might make your software be less compatible is if you utilise features from the latest OS builds where another user may not have updated their system. If you intend on sharing your programs, make sure you specifiy the minimum system of MOS/VDP required.

All languages listed here come with examples to help you get started.

There are several getting started guides on the internet too, as well as YouTube videos, such as those from [https://www.youtube.com/@AgonBits] 

## The Languages

### Basic

This most popular language is installed by many Agon owners and is a great way to quickly start programming your Agon computer. 

> The Agon port of BBC Basic provides a familiar yet powerful language used by beginners and experts alike. It runs directly on the Agon computer and is often started automaticaly by many users with a command in the `autoexec.txt` file.

Reviewer: `autoexec.txt` is arguably outdated...

using a `.txt` file as a command script file was never a great choice :grin: therefore as of MOS 3, the preferred boot file is `!boot.obey`, with fallback support for the old `autoexec.txt` - see https://agonplatform.github.io/agon-docs/MOS/#boot-script

we should probably say here something like:
```suggestion
The Agon port of BBC Basic provides a familiar yet powerful language used by beginners and experts alike. It runs directly on the Agon computer and is often started automatically by many users in their [system boot script](./MOS.md#boot-script).
```

Download from here (16bit mode): https://github.com/breakintoprogram/agon-bbc-basic

> Download from here (ADL mode): https://github.com/breakintoprogram/agon-bbc-basic-adl

Reviewer: I'd probably be inclined to add in a note that explains that this is BBC BASIC from Richard Russell, and it has a direct line of heritage back to the original BBC Micro, and is based on the source code of the version from 1987 that ran on the Z80 second processor.

we should _maybe_ make it clear that this is _essentially_ BBC BASIC 4 as appeared on Acorn's BBC Master machines, which has a few minor changes over the BASIC 2 from the BBC Micro.  (truth is that RTR's BASIC misses at least one feature of Acorn's BBC BASIC 4, which is support for `|` in VDU commands to send 8 zero bytes)

we could add in a link to Dean's port of RTR's BASIC V in here too, noting that it's Z80 mode only and thus restricted to a single 64kb memory segment

BASIC V includes several new keywords, and supports a bunch of useful programming structures, such as multi-line IF statements, CASE statements, WHILE loops.

(I've not managed to work out how many of the new "convenience" keywords are actually supported in Dean's port.  I think that the likes of CIRCLE and RECTANGLE might be, but I'm pretty sure that SYS isn't, which is a shame as if it was then using the MOS API from BASIC would no longer need assembler)

> Download from here (ADL mode): https://github.com/breakintoprogram/agon-bbc-basic-adl

Reviewer: it's probably best to directly link to `/releases/latest` rather than the root of the repository, as some folks would just end up downloading the source :grin:

```suggestion
Download from here (16bit mode): https://github.com/breakintoprogram/agon-bbc-basic/releases/latest

Download from here (ADL mode): https://github.com/breakintoprogram/agon-bbc-basic-adl/releases/latest
```

might also be worth considering using markdown links...

```suggestion
The [Z80 version of BBC BASIC 4](https://github.com/breakintoprogram/agon-bbc-basic) can be [downloaded here](https://github.com/breakintoprogram/agon-bbc-basic/releases/latest).  As this runs in plain Z80 mode it is restricted to a single 64kb memory segment.

The [ADL mode version of BBC BASIC 4](https://github.com/breakintoprogram/agon-bbc-basic-adl) can be [downloaded here](https://github.com/breakintoprogram/agon-bbc-basic-adl/releases/latest).  This supports the full 512kb of system memory in your Agon computer.

A version of [BBC BASIC V](https://github.com/breakintoprogram/agon-bbc-basic-v) is also available that can be [downloaded here](https://github.com/breakintoprogram/agon-bbc-basic-v/releases/latest).  Whilst this supports various new BASIC V keywords, it runs in plain Z80 mode, and so is restricted to a single 64kb memory segment.
```

### Z80 Assembly

If you have ever written software in z80 Assembly for the Sinclair ZX81, ZX Spectrum, MSX, Amstrad CPC, TRS-80, Nintendo Game Boy, or even the Texas Instruments calulators, then this will be familliar territory for you.

You can write your code in whatever text editor you like, then assmble your source code with `ez80asm`, a z80 assembler which runs on the Agon itself, or on Mac, Windows, Linux, and even Raspberry Pi.

> Download ez80asm assembler from here: https://github.com/AgonPlatform/agon-ez80asm

Reviewer: we should probably note here that ez80asm supports eZ80 opcodes as well as plain Z80

we should note here that BBC BASIC has an inbuilt assembler.  for the Z80 versions of BASIC that supports plain Z80 op-codes, but the "ADL" mode version of BASIC it supports the eZ80's additional opcodes too

### C++

> Many programmers enjoy coding in `C` or `C++`. This language is also available and there are a few options for coding on your desktop PC, then compiing and transferring onto your Agon to run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many programmers enjoy coding in `C` or `C++`. This language is also available and there are a few options for coding on your desktop PC, then compiling and transferring onto your Agon to run.
```

A whole development toolchain is available for Windows called `AgDev`, and a Mac/Linux/Raspberry Pi toolchain called `Agondev`.

Download Windows (AgDev) from here: https://github.com/pcawte/AgDev

> And Mac/Linux/Raspberry Pi (AgonDev) from here: https://github.com/AgonPlatform/agondev

Reviewer: I think we'd be better off here primarily pointing towards agondev

I tend to think from an "Agon platform" perspective that AgDev should be considered to be deprecated.  it's not actually Windows only, as there is also a Linux build - but it is strictly x86 only.  it's based on a a toolchain that one could consider to be somewhat outdated.  it's most recent release was also in August 2024, and so has not had any updates related to supporting new MOS 3 features

AgonDev on the other hand is in active development, has support for MOS 3 stuff, and is based on a more modern toolchain.  it has builds for Mac and Linux, supporting both x86 and ARM - the Linux builds can be used on Windows using WSL.  (if I've understood comments on discord correctly I think that some folks do use it natively on Windows without using WSL...)

many common tools and utilities for the Agon have moved their codebases from AgDev to AgonDev...

### B Simple

_B_ was a language which, unsurpisingly, was around before _C_. This interpretation, `B Simple`, allows you to create programs that will be familliar to anyone who has used C, but without all the advanced features of C++. B Simple can be used on the Agon itslef, or on your desktop PC under Mac, Linux, Windows or Raspberry Pi. 

`B Simple`'s approach is to compile your code into z80 assembler, then use the power of `ez80asm` to assemble the compiled code into the final binary executable. It can eaasily be expanded by writing custom libraries in z80 assembler.

Download B Simple from here: https://github.com/nihirash/bsimple-ez80-compiler

### Forth

> Some Agon users might reminisce on the days long gone of owning (or wishing they owned) a Jupiter Ace, with its more obscure _Forth_ programming language. 

Reviewer: hehe :grin:

Forth isn't actually that obscure.  it has quite a wide usage history in embedded systems.  the Open Firmware boot ROM system (used by Apple, IBM, SUN and others) used Forth for it's CLI.

"niche" would maybe be a better descriptor than "obscure" 😀
